added keycloak doc (#4414)
kubeapps/kubeapps: docs/user/OIDC/OAuth2OIDC-keycloak.md

# Configuring Keycloak as an OIDC provider

> (created May 17th 2021)

Reviewer: Not sure if we should add the date here, as it is kind of redundant (this info is already in git) and we don't have it in the rest of the docs.

Author: i will remove the date, and instead include the versions of the charts i used (easier for users)

This document explains how to configure Keycloak as an IDP + OIDC provider (check general information and pre-requisites for [using an OAuth2/OIDC Provider with Kubeapps](../using-an-OIDC-provider.md)).
It covers the installation and documentation for Kubeapps interacting with two AWS clusters. 

> The base installation is done using the bitnami chart for Keycloak.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The base installation is done using the [bitnami chart for Keycloak](https://github.com/bitnami/charts/tree/master/bitnami/keycloak).
```

Author: i will make a change locally to include the chart versions

# Installation

## SSL

> In order to support OIDC or OAuth, most servers and proxies require HTTPS. By default, the certificate created by the helm chart / keycloak server is both invalid (error with notBefore attribute) and also based on a deprecated certificate version making it incompatible to use (i.e. is it based on Common Name instead of SAN and is rejected).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to support OIDC or OAuth, most servers and proxies require HTTPS. By default, the certificate created by the helm chart / keycloak server is both invalid (error with `notBefore` attribute) and also based on a deprecated certificate version making it incompatible to use (i.e. is it based on Common Name instead of SAN and is rejected).
```

> In order to support OIDC or OAuth, most servers and proxies require HTTPS. By default, the certificate created by the helm chart / keycloak server is both invalid (error with notBefore attribute) and also based on a deprecated certificate version making it incompatible to use (i.e. is it based on Common Name instead of SAN and is rejected).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to support OIDC or OAuth, most servers and proxies require HTTPS. By default, the certificate created by the helm chart / Keycloak server is both invalid (error with notBefore attribute) and also based on a deprecated certificate version making it incompatible to use (i.e. is it based on Common Name instead of SAN and is rejected).
```

Author: will fix

> In this section we will see how to configure Keycloak with its “auth.tls” enabled. Note that there are other options to configure TLS, for example via ingress TLS, either manually or using a cert manager. This section will focus on TLS at the server level.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this section, we will see how to configure Keycloak with its `auth.tls` enabled. Note that there are other options to configure TLS, for example via ingress TLS, either manually or using a cert manager. This section will focus on TLS at the server level.
```

#### Step 1:  create private key + certificate

The certificate must be a SAN certificate and should be capable of using wildcard alternative names. Keytool which is typically used for creating certificates does not support SANs with wildcards and is also using jks by default. We will use openssl instead.

To create the certificate, it is useful to create a openssl config file, something like the following (_certificate.config_):
```properties
[req]
default_bits        = 2048
distinguished_name  = req_dn
x509_extensions     = req_ext

[req_dn]
countryName                 = Country Name (2 letter code)
countryName_default         = US
stateOrProvinceName         = State or Province Name (full name)
stateOrProvinceName_default = CA
localityName                = Locality Name (eg, city)
localityName_default        = Campbell
organizationName            = Organization Name (eg, company)
organizationName_default    = vmware.com
commonName                  = Common Name (e.g. server FQDN or YOUR name)
commonName_default          = keycloak

[req_ext]
subjectAltName      = @alt_names

[alt_names]
DNS.1               = *.us-east-2.elb.amazonaws.com
```

> The important section of the config is the [req_ext] extension section with alternate names. As the load balancer URL is created during installation (here on an AWS cluster), we use the wildcard mechanism so the final hostname can be verified by the certificates. Other hostnames, e.g. localhost, can also be added following the numbers pattern (DNS.x).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The important section of the config is the `[req_ext]` extension section with alternate names. As the load balancer URL is created during installation (here on an AWS cluster), we use the wildcard mechanism so the final hostname can be verified by the certificates. Other hostnames, e.g. localhost, can also be added following the numbers pattern (`DNS.x`).
```

```shell
openssl pkcs12 -export -in certificate.crt -inkey certificate.key -name keycloak -out certificate.p12

keytool -importkeystore -srckeystore certificate.p12  -srcstoretype pkcs12 -destkeystore keycloak-0.keystore.jks -alias keycloak
```

Then we need to create the truststore:
```shell
keytool -import -alias keycloak -file certificate.crt -keystore keycloak.truststore.jks
```

#### Step 3: create a k8s secret

The last step is to create a secret in the namespace where Keycloak will be installed.

Note that the names of the keystore and truststore matters and must be exactly as written here (make sure to rename them if the names have been changed in the commands in Step 2):

```shell
kubectl create secret generic keycloak-tls --from-file=./keycloak-0.keystore.jks  --from-file=./keycloak.truststore.jks
```

## Helm Install

To provide a default install, not many values must be provided in values.yaml - this is mostly some default passwords and the name of the secret created in Step 3 above.

> Here is the values.yaml file that i used:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following excerpt shows the relevant values used in the `values.yaml` when installing the Helm Chart:
```

Author: will add in next commit

```yaml
## Keycloak authentication parameters
## ref: https://github.com/bitnami/bitnami-docker-keycloak#admin-credentials
##
auth:

 ## Create administrator user on boot.
 ##
 createAdminUser: true

 ## Keycloak administrator user and password
 ##
 adminUser: admin
 adminPassword: Vmware!23

 ## Wildfly management user and password
 ##
 managementUser: manager
 managementPassword: Vmware!23

 ## TLS encryption parameters
 ## ref: https://github.com/bitnami/bitnami-docker-keycloak#tls-encryption
 ##
 tls:
   enabled: true

   ## Name of the existing secret containing the truststore and one keystore per Keycloak replica
   ##
   jksSecret: keycloak-tls

   ## Password to access the keystore when it's password-protected.
   ##
   keystorePassword: Vmware!23
   ## Password to access the truststore when it's password-protected.
   ##
   truststorePassword: Vmware!23
```

> Then just deploy Keycloak either using Kubeapps or helm cli.

Reviewer: I'd add the command like:

```shell
  helm install keycloak bitnami/keycloak --values my-values.yaml
````

Author: will add in next commit

# Configuration

> Follow the Keycloak documentation to create and configure a new Realm to work with.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Follow the [Keycloak documentation](https://www.keycloak.org/documentation) to create and configure a new Realm to work with.
```

This section will focus on a few aspects to configure for the SSO scenario to work.

## Groups Claim

> By default, there is no “groups” scope/claim. We will create a global client scope for groups.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, there is no "groups" scope/claim. We will create a global client scope for groups.
```

Reviewer: This suggestion also applies to the rest of the right/left quotation marks`“` (unicode 201C and 201D) ---> `"` (unicode 0022)

In the admin console:
 - Click “Client Scopes” from the left navigator menu
 - Click on “Create” from the table (top right corner)
 - Provide a name, ensure the protocol is set to “openid-connect” and that the option “Include in Token Scope” is on.

Once the client scope is created, you should be redirected to a page with several tabs. Navigate to the “Mappers” tab as we need to create a mapper to populate the value of the associated claim:
 - Click on the “Mappers” tab
 - Click on “Create” from the table to create a new mapper
 - Configure:
     - Enter a name
     - Select “Group Membership” as the claim type
     - Enter “groups” as the token claim name
     - Ensure the “Full group path” is OFF
     - Keep the other knobs as ON
 - Click ‘Save’

Note: if you navigate to “Client Scopes” and then select the tab “Default Client Scopes” you should be able to see the newly created “groups” scope in the “available client scopes” lists.

## Clients

> In probably a very simplified view, Clients represent the application to be protected and accessed via SSO and OIDC. In my use case, the environment consisted in the Kubeapps webapp and two AWS clusters. So we need to create three clients.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In probably a very simplified view, Clients represent the application to be protected and accessed via SSO and OIDC. In my use case, the environment consisted of the Kubeapps web app and two AWS clusters. So we need to create three clients.
```

### Cluster clients

For each of the two AWS clusters, we will create a client as follows:
 - Click “Clients” from the left navigator
 - Click “Create” from the table

>  - Enter an “id” and Save (i used aws1 and aws2 respectively)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - Enter an “id” and Save (for example, `aws1`and `aws2` respectively)
```

Once created, configure the authentication as follows:
 - Ensure the protocol is set to “openid-connect”
 - Configure the “Access Type” to be “confidential”. This will add a new “Credentials” tab from which you can get the client secret

>  - For my case, as i just wanted to use tokens to access the cluster, so i disabled “Standard Flow Enabled”. Keep this option if you plan to use a local browser login screen (e.g. if using pinniped cli).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - If you just want to use tokens to access the cluster, you can disable the “Standard Flow Enabled”. Keep this option if you plan to use a local browser login screen (e.g. if using pinniped cli).
```

 - Enter an “id” and Save (i used kubeapps)

Once created, configure the authentication as follows:
 - Ensure the protocol is set to “openid-connect”
 - Configure the “Access Type” to be “confidential”. This will add a new “Credentials” tab from which you can get the client secret
 - Ensure “Standard Flow Enabled” is enabled, this is required for the login screen.
 - “Direct Access Grants Enabled” can be disabled.
 - In the “Valid Redirect URIs” field, enter “http://localhost:8000/*” as a placeholder. We will need to revisit this field once we know the public hostname of kubeapps
 - Save

As for the cluster clients, we need to configure the client scopes:
 - Click the “Client Scopes” tab
 - Ensure the “email” scope is available either in the “Assigned Default Client Scopes” list or the “Assigned Optional Client Scopes” list
 - The “groups” client scope should be available in the lists on the left. Add it either to the “Assigned Default Client Scopes” list or the “Assigned Optional Client Scopes” list.

The last step is to configure the kubeapps client to be aware of the two cluster clients and be allowed to invoke them. There are different ways to configure Keycloak:

>  - Using automatic audience resolution. I did not understand how to use this method, so it is not explained here.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - Using automatic audience resolution. We haven't explored this method yet, therefore it won't be covered in this guide.
```

#### Option #3

In this option, the claim is statically defined via a mapper similar to the one created in option #2.
 - Navigate to the Mappers tab of the kubeapps client
 - Click Create from the table
    - Enter a name
    - For Mapper Type select “Audience”
    - In “Included Client Audience” select the cluster client(e.g. aws1)
    - Ensure “Add to ID token” is enabled
    - Save
 - Repeat for the second cluster

The two client ids will be injected in the audience claim automatically.

## Users

Users are intuitive to create. But they must be configured with a “verified” email address.

The oauth proxy used in kubeapps requires email as the username. Furthermore, if the email is not marked as verified, JWT validation will fail and authentication will fail.

In order to test multiple users with different levels of authorization, it is useful to create them with multiple dummy email addresses. This can be done by ensuring that when the user is created, the field “email verified” is ON (skipping an actual email verification workflow).

# Kubeapps

## Helm Install

Few changes are required to values.yaml for the helm installation:

>  - I changed the frontend service type to LoadBalancer so we can have a public hostname for the callback

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 -The `frontend` service type was changed to LoadBalancer so we can have a public hostname for the callback. Using an ingress could be another alternative.
```
